>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION,
FOR SUNDAY AUGUST 16:
SPYING ON AMERICANS EMAILS AND
PHONE CALLS: THE UNIQUE
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY AND AT&T.
REMEMBERING CIVIL RIGHTS PIONEER
JULIAN BOND.
AND, FROM HAWAII, RESIDENTS
INVEST IN SOLAR POWER, WILL THE
LOCAL UTILITY KEEP UP?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FOR TWO YEARS, SECRET DOCUMENTS
LEAKED BY FORMER NATIONAL
SECURITY CONTRACTOR EDWARD
SNOWDEN HAVE YIELDED A STEADY
STREAM OF NEWS REPORTS ABOUT
U.S. GOVERNMENT SPYING-- ON
TERRORISM SUSPECTS, FOREIGN
LEADERS, AND AMERICAN CITIZENS.
NOW, ANOTHER CHAPTER HAS BEEN
REVEALED: HOW TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GIANT AT&T DEMONSTRATED A,"
EXTREME WILLINGNESS TO HELP"
THE N.S.A.
AN ARTICLE JOINTLY PUBLISHED BY"
THE NEW YORK TIMES" AND THE
INVESTIGATIVE NON-PROFIT PRO-
PUBLICA REPORTS AT&T FORWARDED
ONE MILLION EMAILS A DAY TO THE
N.S.A., HANDED OVER ONE BILLION
CELL PHONE RECORDS A DAY TO THE
N.S.A., AND ASSISTED THE N.S.A.
IN WIRETAPPING INTERNET LINES AT
THE UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS.
THIS IS ACCORDING TO DOCUMENTS
PROVIDED BY SNOWDEN, WHO REMAINS
IN RUSSIA, TO AVOID U.S.
PROSECUTION FOR ESPIONAGE.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THIS
IS REPORTER JEFF LARSON FROM
PRO-PUBLICA.
A YOU YOUR COLLEAGUES AT
PRO-PUBLIC WORKS PUBLICA AND THE
TIMES PUBLISHED THIS.
HOW DID YOU PROVE THAT THIS
EXISTED?
>> IT WAS A LONG TIME TO PROVE
THAT FAIRVIEW WAS AT&T.
WE WENT THROUGH THE DOCUMENTS
WITH A FINE TOOTH COMB LOOKING
FOR THINGS LIKE INTERNAL
ACRONYMS THAT AT&T USED, AND FCC
REPORTS.
>> THEIR VIEW WAS SORT OF A CODE
NAME THAT YOU HADN'T FIGURED OUT
THAT WAS AT&T.
>> EXACTLY.
IT'S BEEN OUT BEFORE, THERE'S
BEEN MENTIONS ON BRAZILIAN TV ON
FAIRVIEW.
NO ONE HAD PUT TWO AND TWO
TOGETHER AND PUT IT TOGETHER.
SO STARTING IN FEBRUARY WE
LOOKED THROUGH THE DOCUMENTS AND
TRIED TO SHOW THIS, IT'S AN
EXTREMELY CLOSE PARTNERSHIP.
AT&T ENGINEERS CAME IN HAND WITH
THE NSA TO ENABLE SPYING AND IN
SOME CASES IN MANY CASES THE
AT&T ACTUALLY DOES THE FILTERING
ON BEHALF OF THE NSA, IN THEIR
OWN FACILITY.
Sreenivasan: SO THEY'RE NOT
ACTUALLY HANDING ALL THE
INFORMATION THEY'RE SORTING IT
OUT BEFORE IT GOES TO THE NSA?
>> YES, BUT IT'S A LARGE
PORTION.
THE THOSE CELL PHONE RECORDS ARE
PRETTY BULKY AND THEY
INCLUDE DOMESTIC ONES.
IT TURNED OUT IN 2013 THAT
VERIZON WAS HANDING OUT THEM BUT
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT SAID IT WAS
ONLY LAND LINE AND NOT CELL
PHONE RECORDS.
>> HOW DO YOU SORT THROUGH THAT
AND WHERE DO THEY GET ACCESS TO
THAT?
JUST PEOPLE USING at&t.com
E-MAIL?
>> IT'S NOT AT&T E-MAIL, IT IS
THE BIG PIPES OF THE INTERNET
AND THEY ALSO PROVIDE THOSE BIG
PIPES TO CORPORATE PARTNERS THAT
AT&T HAS.
SO YOU KNOW PLACES LIKE LEVEL 3,
OR COMCAST, IF YOU HAVE HOME
INTERNET, IT LARGELY WILL GO
OVER AT&T NETWORKS AT SOME POINT
WHEN IT TRANSITS THE UNITED
STATES.
LARGELY WITH THE NSA BECAUSE
IT'S A FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY THEY ARE INTERESTED IN
FORTUNE E-MAIL SO A LARGE
PORTION OF THAT WILL BE PEOPLE
OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES AND
THAT'S NOT NECESSARILY COVERED
BY UNITED STATES LAW.
IT'S FAIR GAME AS FAR AS THE NSA
IS CONCERNED.
>> WHEN YOU LOOK THROUGH THESE
POWERPOINTS YOU ACTUALLY SEE
INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE NSA TO
BEHAVE NICELY WHEN THEY GO INTO
AT&T OFFICES.
>> RIGHT THEY SAY THIS IS A
COLLABORATIVE RELATIONSHIP
RIGHT?
THAT THERE'S THIS EXTREME
WILLINGNESS TO HELP ON AT&T'S
BEHALF RIGHT?
SHORTLY AFTER 9/11 THERE WERE
TWO TELECOMS THAT WENT TO THE
NSA AND SAID HOW CAN WE HELP
RIGHT?
ONE OF THEM WE KNOW NOW IS AT&T.
SO THIS IS YOU KNOW AT&T SEES
THIS AS SORT OF A PATRIOTIC DUTY
I THINK.
Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES AT&T
SAY ABOUT THIS?
>> AT&T SORT OF GAVE US A
SURPRISING RESPONSE, WE DON'T
COMMENT ON NATIONAL SECURITY
MATTERS RIGHT?
AND LATER WHEN WE CIRCLE BACK TO
THEM THEY SAID, WE COMPLY WITH
THE LAW ESSENTIALLY RIGHT?
SO WE DON'T WILLINGLY DO THIS.
WE ONLY COMPLY WITH THE LAW.
WHICH IS SORT OF AT ODDS WITH
WHAT'S IN THE DOCUMENTS.
Sreenivasan: AND DOES THAT
MEAN ESSENTIALLY THEY ARE BEING
COMPELLED?
>> WE DON'T KNOW BECAUSE THE
DOCUMENTS ARE SO OLD, OR I MEAN
TWO YEARS OLD WE DON'T KNOW HOW
THINGS HAVE CHANGED AFTER
CONGRESS PASSED THE U.S.A.
FREEDOM ACT, WE ALSO DON'T
NECESSARILY KNOW WHAT HAPPENED
IN THE TWO INTERVENING YEARS.
WE KNOW VERIZON DID TRY AND
CHALLENGE SOME THINGS IN COURT
BUT WE REALLY HAVE NO IDEA IF
THE PROGRAM IS EXACTLY THE SAME
AS IT WAS IN 2013 BEFORE THE
SNOWDEN REVELATIONS.
>> JEFF LARSON FROM PRO-PUBLICA
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE KEY
DOCUMENTS DETAILING THE EXTENT
OF THE INFORMATION SHARING
BETWEEN AT&T AND THE N.S.A., AND
READ AT&T'S STATEMENT TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA IS
CALLING CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER
JULIAN BOND A HERO WHO HELPED
CHANGE THE COUNTRY FOR THE
BETTER.
BOND DIED SATURDAY, IN FLORIDA.
GRANDSON OF A SLAVE AND SON OF A
COLLEGE PRESIDENT, BOND ATTENDED
ATLANTA'S MOREHOUSE COLLEGE,
WHERE HE WAS A STUDENT IN A
PHILOSOPHY CLASS TAUGHT BY
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.
IN THE 1960s, BOND HELP LEAD THE
STUDENT NONVIOLENT COORDINATING
COMMITTEE, KNOWN AS SNICK,
PLANNING NONVIOLENT PROTESTS
THROUGHOUT THE SEGREGATED SOUTH.
AT THE AGE OF 26, BOND WAS
ELECTED TO THE GEORGIA STATE
LEGISLATURE AND SERVED 20 YEARS.
HE MADE A RUN FOR CONGRESS BUT
LOST AN EPIC RACE TO FELLOW
CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVIST JOHN
LEWIS, IN 1986.
BOND WAS THE FIRST PRESIDENT OF
THE SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER,
WHICH ADVOCATES FOR JUSTICE AND
EQUALITY, AND LATER, CHAIRMAN OF
THE N.A.A.C.P., AND SERVED MORE
THAN A DECADE IN THAT POST.
TWO YEARS AGO, BOND SPOKE AT THE
50th ANNIVERSARY OF THE 1963
MARCH ON WASHINGTON FOR JOBS AND
FREEDOM.
>> WE ARE STILL BEING TESTED BY
HARDSHIPS AND ADVERSITY.
FROM THE ELEVATION OF STAND YOUR
GROUND LAWS TO THE EVISCERATION
OF THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT.
BUT TODAY WE COMMIT OURSELVES AS
WE DID 50 YEARS AGO TO GREATER
EFFORTS AND GRANDER VICTORIES.
>> Sreenivasan: JULIAN BOND WAS
75.
TO DISCUSS HIS LEGACY, I AM
JOINED VIA SKYPE FROM MARTHA'S
VINEYARD BY CONGRESSWOMAN
ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, A CIVIL
RIGHTS PIONEER IN HER OWN RIGHT,
WHOSE RELATIONSHIP WITH BOND
WENT BACK TO THEIR DAYS AT
SNICK.
WHEN YOU HEARD THE NEWS WHAT
WENT THROUGH YOUR MIND?
>> WELL I WASN'T EVEN A LITTLE
BIT READY TO LOSE MY GOOD FRIEND
AND CONSTITUENT.
BECAUSE -- BECAUSE JULIAN HAS
LIVED IN WASHINGTON NOW, FOR
MORE THAN 25 YEARS AND BEEN A
CHAMPION AMONG OTHER THINGS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
I SAW HIM ONLY A FEW MONTHS AGO
WHEN HE CAME RIGHT AFTER
FERGUSON WHEN I HAD A FORUM AT
HOWARD UNIVERSITY, TO DISCUSS
RACIAL PROFILING.
I WANTED TO HAVE JULIAN COME
BECAUSE I WANTED TO HAVE THIS
CONVERSATION, JULIAN AND ME WITH
THE STUDENTS IN ORDER TO LET
THEM KNOW WE WERE IN TOUCH WITH
THEIR MOVEMENT AND WE UNDERSTOOD
THEIR MOVEMENT AT A DISTANCE,
THAN OUR MOVEMENT AND AS THEIR
MOVEMENT SHOWED THAT OUR
MOVEMENT NEEDED TO BE UPDATED.
BECAUSE FOR ALL THE ACHIEVEMENTS
OF OUR MOVEMENT WE HAD NOT
TOUCHED RACIAL PROFILING.
WHAT JULIAN MANAGED TO DO WAS
SOMETHING THAT MOST OF US WHO
WERE IN SNCC, THE STUDENT
NONVIOLENT COORDINATING
COMMITTEE, DID NOT DO.
HE MANAGED TO SPEND HIS ENTIRE
LIFE IN CIVIL RIGHTS.
NOT THE SENTIMENTAL CIVIL RIGHTS
OF OUR SNCC DAYS BUT THE CIVIL
RIGHTS OF OUR TIME.
AND THAT'S WHY HE WAS SO
RESPECTED AND SUCH A
SOUGHT-AFTER SPEAKER.
Sreenivasan: CAN YOU GIVE US
AN IDEA OF THE CONTRIBUTIONS
THAT HE HAS MADE THAT MOST OF US
OF THIS GENERATION NOW MIGHT NOT
RECOGNIZE?
>> WELL, IF YOU THINK ABOUT IT,
FROM THE GENERATION OF SNCC
PEOPLE, THOSE OF US WHO WERE IN
THE STUDENT MOVEMENT, THERE WERE
TWO OR THREE THAT ACHIEVED SOME
KINDS OF PROMINENCE AFTERWARDS.
MARION BERRY BECAME THE MAYOR OF
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
JOHN LEWIS WHO STILL IS THE ICON
OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
JULIAN BOND AND I'M RUNNING OUT
OF NAMES.
THE FACT IS NOT EVERYBODY
SURVIVED THOSE SNCC DAYS, IT
TOOK A LOT OF PEOPLE OUT OF
PEOPLE.
IT ALMOST DESTROYED SOME PEOPLE.
SO JULIAN WAS NOT ONLY A
SURVIVOR OF SNCC.
HE WENT ON TO GROW THE CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE YOU
GOING TO MISS MOST ABOUT HIM?
>> I'M GOING TO MISS HAVING A
NATIONAL SPOKESMAN, WHEN
SOMETHING HAPPENED ON OUR
RIGHTS, TO SPEAK OUT FOR THE
COUNTRY.
THERE ARE REALLY VERY FEW
LEADERS LIKE THAT WHO ARE
NATIONALLY KNOWN, WHO ARE
NATIONALLY PROMINENT AND WHO ARE
NATIONALLY APPRECIATED, ACROSS
THE GENERATION.
AND SOMEHOW HE MANAGED NOT TO
STOP SERVING UNTIL THE END OF
HIS LIFE.
THAT IS QUITE A LIFE TO HAVE
LIVED.
>> CONGRESSWOMAN ELEANOR HOLMES
NORTON.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> ALWAYS A PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER TWO
DECADES IN BUSINESS, amazon.com
IS THE WORLD'S LARGEST INTERNET
RETAILER, WITH A STOCK VALUE
THAT HAS INCREASED TEN-FOLD
SINCE 2008.
THAT SUCCESS IS DRIVEN BY A
WORKFORCE MOTIVATED BY DATA-
DRIVEN MANAGERS WHO ENFORCE
PRINCIPLES LAID DOWN BY COMPANY
FOUNDER JEFF BEZOS.
THAT'S PART OF THE TAKEAWAY FROM
TODAY'S "NEW YORK TIMES" STORY,"
INSIDE AMAZON: WRESTLING BIG
IDEAS IN A BRUISING WORKPLACE."
BASED ON MORE THAN 100
INTERVIEWS, THE STORY DEPICTS A
CORPORATE CULTURE WHERE
EMPLOYEES ARE PUSHED TO THE
LIMIT.
DAVID STREITFELD IS ONE OF THE
AUTHORS.
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM SAN
FRANCISCO.
>> WHAT IS THE CULTURE THAT YOU
FOUND?
>> IT IS A VERY INTENSE CULTURE,
A VERY HARD-WORKING CULTURE, A
CULTURE WHERE PEOPLE FEEL THEY
WANT TO PUSH THEMSELVES, AS FAR
AS THEY CAN, AND THEY DO.
Sreenivasan: SO FAR NONE OF
THAT WHAT YOU JUST SAID SOUNDS
LIKE A BAD THING FOR A COMPANY.
>> NO, IT'S A GREAT THING FOR A
COMPANY.
IF YOU HAVE A COMPANY OF TYPE-A
PERFORMERS AND THEY'RE ALWAYS
PERFORMING AT THE LIMITS OF WHAT
THEY CAN DO, YOU CAN DO AMAZING
THINGS.
WHICH AMAZON INDEED HAS.
>> WHAT DO YOU FIND UNIQUE ABOUT
WHAT'S HAPPENING INSIDE AMAZON'S
WORK CULTURE?
>> THE UNIQUE WAS JUST HOW WELL
THEY MAINTAINED THAT CULTURE OF
ENDURANCE AND EXCELLENCE.
STARTUPS DO THAT SORT OF THING.
THEY WORK ALL THE TIME.
AND PEOPLE ARE COMPLETELY
DEVOTED TO THE COMPANY AND THE
REST OF THEIR LIFE FALLS AWAY.
THE UNIQUE THING WITH AMAZON IS,
THEY HAD PRESERVED TO A LARGE
EXTENT THAT START-UP CULTURE, TO
A COMPANY THAT WAS EMPLOYING
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE.
AND THAT'S A REMARKABLE THING TO
DO, AND I DON'T KNOW OF MANY
OTHER COMPANIES, IF ANY, THAT
HAVE MANAGED TO DO IT.
>> SOME OF THE ANECDOTES YOU
WRITE ABOUT ARE ALMOST IN DIRECT
OPPOSITION TO THE OTHER STORIES
OF TECH LIFE THAT'S THAT WE
HEAR, THAT NET FLEX HAVE A YEAR
LONG MATERNITY OR PATERNITY
LEAVE, AND GOOGLE HAS A GREAT
POLICY, AND AMAZON IS NOT LIKE
THAT.
>> IT'S MUCH MORE SEVERE.
HAS A LOT OF TECHNOLOGY BUT ITS
SELF IMAGE IS NOT AS A TECH
COMPANY, IT IS OF A RETAILER.
IN THE RETAIL BUSINESS MARGINS
ARE VERY THIN AND BENEFITS ARE
COMPARATIVELY LESS.
Sreenivasan: AND YOU DESCRIBE
THE SITUATION AT THE END OF
EVERY YEAR WHERE THEY CUT BACK
THEIR EMPLOYEES OR THEIR LOWEST
PERFORMERS?
>> AMAZON USES A TECHNIQUE WHICH
WAS RELATIVELY WIDESPREAD IN
CORPORATE AMERICA MAYBE TEN
YEARS AGO.
AND SOME COMPANIES, OTHER
COMPANIES STILL USE IT NOW,
CALLED THE CRUDEST NAME FOR IT
WHICH COMPANIES DO NOT USE IS
RANK AND YANK.
YOU DECIDE WHERE EVERYONE FITS,
AND THOSE AT THE BOTTOM, THOSE
THAT RANK THE LOWEST, YOU EITHER
ENCOURAGE TO LEAVE, OR YOU COULD
JUST RELEASE THEM.
Sreenivasan: WHAT DID AMAZON
SAY TO THIS AS YOU WERE
REPORTING?
>> AMAZON HAS ALWAYS PRIDED
ITSELF ON BEING A VERY TOUGH
PLACE TO WORK.
THEY'VE SAID THIS FROM THE VERY
BEGINNING.
AS JEFF BEZOS SAID EARLY ON TO
NEW EMPLOYEES, IT'S NOT EASY TO
WORK HERE.
AND WITHOUT IT BEING -- WITHOUT
THOSE HIGH STANDARDS, YOU
PROBABLY NEVER WOULD HAVE HEARD
OF AMAZON.
IT WOULD NOT EXIST NOW.
THE QUESTION IS FOR EMPLOYEES
WHO ARE DIVERTED BY CRISES, WHAT
HAPPENS TO THEM?
Sreenivasan: DAVID STREITFELD,
ONE OF THE CO-AUTHORS ON THE NEW
YORK TIMES, THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT TONIGHT TAKES US TO
HAWAII, A STATE THAT SEES
SUNSHINE THREE OUT OF EVERY FOUR
DAYS, AND HAS USED THAT SUNSHINE
TO BECOME ONE OF THE TOP TEN
STATES FOR DEVELOPING RENEWABLE
SOLAR ENERGY.
CONVERTING THAT SOLAR ENERGY
INTO ELECTRICITY HASN'T BEEN SO
SIMPLE.
IN THIS UPDATED STORY WE FIRST
BROADCAST IN THE SPRING,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MIKE TAIBBI REPORTS THAT
HOMEOWNERS IN HONOLULU AND THEIR
UTILITY COMPANY FIND THEMSELVES
AT A CROSSROADS.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE EVERYWHERE
ON OAHU: ON THE ROOFS OF
BUSINESSES, LIBRARIES, AND ONE
HOUSE AFTER ANOTHER.
THE AMOUNT OF ROOFTOP SOLAR NOW
ACCOUNTS FOR 12% OF THE ELECTRIC
UTILITY'S USERS.
THAT'S MORE THAN 20 TIMES THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE.
IT'S BY FAR THE HIGHEST
PENETRATION OF INDIVIDUAL
ROOFTOP SOLAR IN THE COUNTRY.
BUT IN THIS TROPICAL STATE,
WHERE THE COMBINATION OF SKY-
HIGH ENERGY PRICES, ABUNDANT
SUNSHINE, AND FEDERAL AND STATE
TAX CREDITS MAKES GOING SOLAR A
NO-BRAINER, THE VERY POPULARITY
OF THESE PANELS HAS BECOME A
PROBLEM...
>> SO WE DRIVE UP, AND YOU HAVE
THESE LOVELY SOLAR PANELS ON
YOUR ROOF.
HOW'S THAT WORKING OUT FOR YOU?
>> IT'S NOT.
>> Reporter: NOT WORKING OUT
BECAUSE BY THE TIME AIRCRAFT
MECHANIC CARLTON HO JOINED THE
ROOFTOP SOLAR PARADE IN
SEPTEMBER 2013, THERE WERE SO
MANY PEOPLE IN HIS AREA THAT HAD
INSTALLED PANELS THAT THE LOCAL
UTILITY COMPANY TOLD HIM, "DON'T
TURN ON THAT SWITCH YET."
SO, IT'S JUST A QUESTION OF
TURNING THE SWITCH ON AND YOU
HAVE JUICE.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: FROM YOUR OWN ROOF.
>> AND EVERYTHING'S AWESOME!
[LAUGHS]
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S NOT THAT
SIMPLE.
WHEN YOU INSTALL SOLAR PANELS,
YOU'RE STILL RELIANT ON THE
LOCAL UTILITY.
WHEN IT'S DARK OR WHEN THE SUN
ISN'T SHINING, YOU NEED THE GRID
TO PROVIDE ELECTRICITY.
EVEN SO, SOLAR CUSTOMERS HAVE A
FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UTILITY.
BECAUSE WHEN THE SUNIS SHINING,
ANY EXTRA ENERGY THEIR PANELS
GENERATE IS SUPPLIED BACK TO THE
GRID. THAT EARNS A CREDIT,
FURTHER REDUCING THEIR ELECTRIC
BILL.
IN SOME SECTIONS OF OAHU, WITH
SO MANY HOMEOWNERS GOING SOLAR,
THE UTILITY SAID THE SAFETY AND
RELIABILITY OF THE GRID COULD BE
THREATENED AND IT SLOWED TO A
CRAWL THE APPROVAL OF NEW
SYSTEMS.
>> WE KNOW THERE IS STILL MORE
TO DO.
>> Reporter: COLTON CHING IS
VICE PRESIDENT FOR ENERGY
DELIVERY AT HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC
COMPANY, OR HECO, AS THE UTILITY
IS KNOWN.
>> WHAT WAS HAPPENING WAS THAT
POWER, WHICH NORMALLY FLOWS FROM
THE GRID TO OUR CUSTOMERS, WERE
NOW BEGINNING TO FLOW BACK INTO
THOSE SUBSTATIONS.
SUBSTATIONS WHICH WERE NOT 30,
40 YEARS AGO DESIGNED TO OPERATE
IN THAT MANNER.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION, HECO
HAD A HARD TIME MEASURING ALL
THAT SOLAR.
>> RIGHT NOW, WE DON'T KNOW
EXACTLY HOW MUCH POWER ROOFTOP
SOLAR IS PRODUCING, AT ANY GIVEN
MOMENT.
>> Reporter: SO YOU CAN'T SEE AT
ALL WHAT 10-12% OF YOUR CUSTOMER
BASE IS PRODUCING?
>> WE CANNOT.
WE CANNOT SEE THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT WHILE HECO
STUDIED THE PROBLEM, HOMEOWNERS
LIKE CARLTON HO WERE LEFT
WAITING.
IT HAD BEEN A YEAR-AND-A-HALF
THAT HIS SYSTEM HAD SAT UNUSED.
HO WAS LEFT PAYING HIS REGULAR
ELECTRIC BILL: ABOUT $150 A
MONTH.
PLUS ANOTHER $240 A MONTH IN
PAYMENTS FOR THE $23,000 SOLAR
PANELS HE'D BOUGHT BUT COULDN'T
USE.
>> HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC NEEDS TO
AND HAS TAKEN STEPS TO WORK WITH
OUR CUSTOMERS TO FIND SOLUTIONS
THAT WORKS FOR THEM AND WORKS
FOR THE GRID.
IT'S BEEN LEARNING MOMENTS, FOR
US WITHIN THE UTILITY.
>> Reporter: AND FOR THE SOLAR
INDUSTRY WHICH TOOK A BIG HIT
WHEN THE UTILITY SLOWED NEW
APPROVALS: THERE WERE HUNDREDS
OF LAYOFFS AND STOCKPILES OF
SOLAR EQUIPMENT.
BUT THOSE SOLAR CUSTOMERS
WAITING TO TURN ON THEIR SYSTEMS
OR EVEN GET PERMISSION TO START
CONSTRUCTION KNEW THAT GOING
SOLAR WOULD STILL BE A GOOD
DEAL: A SYSTEM UP AND RUNNING
WOULD REDUCE THEIR ENERGY BILLS
DRAMATICALLY.
IN THE MEANTIME, NON-SOLAR
CUSTOMERS, STILL THE MAJORITY,
WERE PAYING MUCH MORE TO
MAINTAIN THE PUBLIC GRID THAN
THOSE WITH THEIR OWN PANELS ON
THE ROOF, A DISPARITY HECO
SUGGESTED COULD BE UNFAIR.
>> IT MAKES SENSE THAT EVERYONE
WHO USES THE GRID SHOULD PAY
THEIR SHARE.
>> Reporter: HECO SAYS THAT NON-
SOLAR CUSTOMERS HAVE IN A SENSE
BEEN SUBSIDIZING THOSE WITH
ROOFTOP SOLAR WHEN IT COMES TO
KEEPING THE GRID HUMMING.
A COST SHIFT ESTIMATED AT MORE
THAN $50 MILLION.
ALL THESE PROBLEMS-- DELAYS,
QUESTIONS ABOUT GRID
RELIABILITY, AND FAIRNESS--
COULD SOON BE SEEN ALL ACROSS
THE COUNTRY AS THE PENETRATION
OF ROOFTOP SOLAR CONTINUES TO
INCREASE.
SOLAR PANELS ARE NO LONGER JUST
FOR SUNBELT STATES, EVEN THE
WHITE HOUSE HAD PANELS INSTALLED
LAST YEAR.
>> Reporter: DR. MARCO
MANGELSDORF IS A SOLAR
CONTRACTOR WHO ALSO TEACHES
ENERGY POLITICS.
>> WE ARE ON THE NEW FRONTIER IN
HAWAII AS FAR AS TRYING TO COME
UP WITH A PRACTICAL, SAFE ANSWER
TO AN-- A VERY, VERY DIFFICULT
QUESTION WHICH DOES NOT HAVE A
DEFINITIVE ANSWER.
>> Reporter: NAMELY, HOW MUCH
ROOFTOP SOLAR CAN THE GRID
ACCOMMODATE.
AND WHILE DELAYS FOR ROOFTOP
SOLAR CUSTOMERS HAVE ANGERED
MANY IN HAWAII, MANGELSDORF
ARGUES THAT THE CAUTION SHOWN BY
THE UTILITY IS UNDERSTANDABLE.
>> YOU CANNOT ALLOW A FREE-FOR-
ALL, ANYBODY AND EVERYBODY TO
CONNECT TO A UTILITY GRID
WITHOUT ANY TYPE OF REQUIREMENTS
OR MONITORING.
I MEAN THE UTILITY GRID IS A
PUBLIC GOOD, PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT MUST BE
MAINTAINED.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME SAY DELAYS
IN APPROVING ROOFTOP SOLAR ARE
LESS ABOUT PRUDENCE AND MORE
ABOUT PROFIT, AND ABOUT
PRESERVING THE UTILITY'S CENTURY
OLD BUSINESS MODEL AS A
MONOPOLY.
>> THE PROBLEM IS, IS THAT THEY
INHERENTLY DON'T WANT TO SEE
MORE OF THIS ROOFTOP SOLAR, AND
YET THEY'RE ALSO ARBITERS OF
WHAT POWER CAN COME ON OR WHAT'S
RELIABLE AND WHAT'S SAFE.
>> Reporter: ROBERT HARRIS IS
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC POLICY FOR
SUNRUN, ANOTHER SOLAR
CONTRACTOR.
>> THE COMPARISON WOULD BE, FOR
EXAMPLE, THE TYPEWRITER INDUSTRY
TRYING TO STOP COMPUTERS,
BECAUSE THEY WANT TO PRESERVE
THEIR OWN BUSINESS MODEL.
AND HERE ARGUE THAT THERE'S A
BETTER MODEL OUT THERE THAT'S
GOING TO BE CHEAPER AND CLEANER.
>> Reporter: DID HECO FAIL IN
SOME FUNDAMENTAL WAY TO SEE THE
FUTURE?
>> I DON'T THINK WE FAILED, I
DO, IN HINDSIGHT, BELIEVE THAT
WE COULD HAVE SEEN IT SOONER.
THIS CHANGE IN RELATIONSHIP, THE
CHANGE IN THE COMPACT BETWEEN
THE UTILITY AND ITS CUSTOMERS.
>> Reporter: THE NUMBER OF SOLAR
PANEL PERMITS IN HAWAII IS UP,
COMPARED TO A YEAR AGO, AND HECO
SAYS IT HOPES TO TRIPLE ROOFTOP
SOLAR CAPACITY IN 15 YEARS.
BUT HECO MAY NOT BE IN A
POSITION TO DECIDE THAT.
IT IS BEING SOLD TO NEXT ERA, A
FLORIDA BASED UTILITY GIANT.
IF THE DEAL WITH NEXT ERA DOES
GO THROUGH, HAWAII'S ELECTRICITY
CONSUMERS WILL BE SERVICED BY A
COMPANY THAT SAYS IT IS
COMMITTED TO RENEWABLE ENERGY
SOURCES.
BUT THAT COMMITMENT HAS COME
UNDER SCRUTINY FROM HAWAII'S
GOVERNOR, ENERGY ORGANIZATIONS,
AND THE STATE'S CONSUMER
ADVOCATE.
THEY SAY NEXT ERA HAS NOT YET
SHOWN HOW IT PLANS TO FULFILL
THE STATE'S INITIATIVE TO MOVE
TOWARD 100% RENEWABLE ENERGY BY
THE YEAR 2045.
TO HIT THAT TARGET, STATE
REGULATORS HAVE APPROVED
CONSTRUCTION OF FOUR NEW
UTILITY-SCALE SOLAR FARMS ON
OAHU, WITH THREE MORE FARMS
PROPOSED.
IT SAYS OFF HERE AND ON HERE.
>> ONCE WE GET THIS THING
POWERED, YEAH.
A-YEAR-AND-A-HALF OF
FRUSTRATION, WE'LL GET OVER IT.
>> Reporter: FOR CARLTON HO AND
HIS FAMILY, THAT DAY FINALLY
ARRIVED AFTER A YEAR AND A HALF
OF WAITING, THIS SPRING, HE
RECEIVED PERMISSION TO TURN THAT
SWITCH ON AND HIS SOLAR SYSTEM
IS NOW UP AND RUNNING.
>> Ifill: MAJOR CANDIDATES FOR
PRESIDENT DESCENDED ON THE IOWA
STATE FAIR THIS WEEKEND
INCLUDING THE TWO POLAR
OPPOSITES, BERNIE SANDERS AND
DONALD TRUMP.
MY REPORT, TOMORROW NIGHT ON THE
PBS NEWSHOUR.
Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
CELEBRATING 70 YEARS OF PEACE.
FIREWORKS LIT THE SKY ABOVE
PEARL HARBOR TONIGHT, TO MARK
THE END OF WORLD WAR II.
SISTER CITY IN JAPAN SUPPLIED
THE FIREWORKS.
EARLIER, MAYORS FROM CITIES LAID
THE WREATH AT THE NAVAL BASE.
THE ARCHITECT WHO DREW THE
U.S. INTO THE WAR WAS FROM
NAGAOKA.
THAT IS IT FOR TODAY'S
PBS NEWS HOUR WEEKEND,
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.